Libidn ANNOUNCE -- Overview to attract interest.
See the end for copying conditions.

Libidn is an implementation of the Stringprep/Nameprep, Punycode and
IDNA specifications defined by the Internationalized Domain Names IETF
working group to implement internationalized domain names.  It is
licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License.

The library contains a generic Stringprep implementation (with Unicode
3.2 NFKC normalization, table mapping of characters, and the
Bidirectional Character handling), and currently two Stringprep
profiles; Nameprep (for IDN) and Kerberos5.  The library also
implements Punycode, and the low-level IDNA operations.  A high-level
API for handling internationalized domain names is being developed.

The Stringprep API consists of two main functions, one for converting
data from the system's native representation into UTF-8, and one
function to perform the Stringprep processing.  Each stringprep
profile has a corresponding CPP macro.  Adding a new Stringprep for
your application is straightforward. The Punycode API consists of one
encoding function and one decoding function.  The IDNA API consists of
the ToASCII and ToUnicode functions.

The library is currently used by forthcoming SASL and Kerberos
libraries to process user names and passwords before they are input to
cryptographic operations.  It is also used by experimental code for
domain name related purposes.

Libidn is developed for the GNU/Linux system, but runs on over 20 Unix
platforms (including Linux, Solaris, IRIX, AIX, and Tru64) and
Windows.

The project page of the library is available at:
http://www.josefsson.org/libstringprep/

For more information see:
http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/idn-charter.html
http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-hoffman-stringprep-07.txt
http://www.i-d-n.net/

Further information including paid contract development:
Simon Josefsson <simon@josefsson.org>

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright (C) 2002 Simon Josefsson

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
are permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright
notice and this notice are preserved.
